Good evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away. On the
NEWSHOUR tonight: a fragile
ceasefire in Yemen is in danger
of collapsing, as U.N.-backed
peace talks are in motion. Also
ahead this Thursday: new
research finds what parents
worry about changes based on the
family's income. And,
fishermen's tales. What the
refugee crisis looks like to
those living on the Greek island
of Lesbos. Plus, a galaxy far,
far away at a theater near you.
How "Star Wars" has captivated
fans for nearly four decades.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: "Star Wars"
transcends genres in some ways.
It becomes whatever we bring to
it. It's a western, it's science
fiction, it's fantasy, it's
philosophy, it's family drama.
It becomes a thing that all of
us can connect to on some level.
WOODRUFF: All that and more on
tonight's PBS NEWSHOUR. (BREAK)
WOODRUFF: The Republican-led
House of Representatives pushed
through a huge tax cut bill
today, costing an estimated $680
billion over 10 years. The vote
was 318 to 109 for a package
that keeps alive an array of tax
breaks for businesses and
families. It drew bipartisan
support. Speaker Paul Ryan says
they will vote tomorrow on a
separate trillion-dollar
spending package to fund the
government in 2016. REP. PAUL
RYAN (R-WI), SPEAKER OF THE
HOUSE: We are where we are, and
we have a bipartisan compromise,
where, by the way, I think we've
got some good wins. And look,
Democrats win some things, too.
That's the nature of bipartisan
compromises. And so, the way I
look at this is, we have made
the best of the situation we
have. There are some really good
wins in here for the American
people. There are very good wins
in here for the economy, for job
creators, for taxpayers.
WOODRUFF: But Minority Leader
Nancy Pelosi says many Democrats
might shun the omnibus spending
bill, that's partly it ends a
40-year ban on exporting oil,
and because it denies debt
relief to Puerto Rico. REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), MINORITY
LEADER: Many of our Democrats
still have some concerns about
what is in the omnibus and what
isn't in the omnibus. And
particularly what isn't, and
that is what we wanted -- the
opportunity for Puerto Rico to
do restructuring to declare
bankruptcy. WOODRUFF: The Senate
may pass both bills tomorrow,
before adjourning for the year.
The man who bought the rifles
used in the San Bernardino
shootings was arrested today.
Enrique Marquez is accused of
conspiring to aid terrorists and
other federal charges. He
purchased the guns in 2011 and
2012 for his friend, Syed
Farook. This month, Farook and
his wife, Tashfeen Malik, shot
14 people to death at a holiday
party. President Obama meets
with relatives of the San
Bernardino victims tomorrow, in
California. Today, he urged
Americans to be vigilant over
the holidays, but he said at
this time, there's no credible
information of any new plot. He
spoke at the National
Counterterrorism Center in
McClain, Virginia, after getting
briefed on the current threat
level. BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES: Anyone
trying to harm Americans need to
know -- they need to know that
we're strong, we're resilient,
that we will not be terrorized.
We have prevailed over much
greater threats than this. We
will prevail again. WOODRUFF:
Meanwhile, the U.N. Security
Council moved to disrupt the
Islamic State group's revenue
flow. Security Council members
approved a resolution sponsored
by the U.S. and Russia. It
targets money from smuggled oil
and looted antiquities, plus
ransom payments. Libya's two
rival governments agreed on a
unity deal today in the face of
a growing Islamic state
presence. Officials from the
internationally recognized
parliament in eastern Libya, and
the Islamic-backed one in
Tripoli, signed the agreement in
Morocco. It was not clear if all
of the country's warring groups
will go along. Russian President
Vladimir Putin says Moscow wants
improved ties with Washington,
despite tensions over Syria and
Ukraine. But, Turkey is a
different matter. In a year-end
briefing today, Putin cited
Turkey's downing of a Russian
warplane last month. Then, he
used decidedly off-color
language to suggest the Turks
might have acted to gain favor
with the U.S. VLADIMIR PUTIN,
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT (through
translator): You asked whether
it was possible that a third
party is involved. I get your
inference, but we do not know
this. If someone in the Turkish
government decided to lick the
Americans in some of their
private parts -- well, I don't
know. I can imagine that on some
level, there were agreements.
WOODRUFF: Putin also confirmed,
for the first time, the presence
of Russian forces in Eastern
Ukraine, but he said they are
not regular troops. Back this in
country, there's word that
former House Speaker Dennis
Hastert is recovering from a
stroke, six weeks ago. His
lawyer says Hastert is
hospitalized in Illinois. Last
October, the one-time Republican
leader pleaded guilty in a
hush-money scheme to hide
personal misconduct from decades
ago. He's to be sentenced in
February. Defense Secretary
Ashton Carter acknowledged today
he used an unsecured, personal
e-mail account to conduct
government business, early in
his tenure. Carter was asked
about it during a stop in Iraq,
after a "New York Times" report.
ASH CARTER, SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE: What I was doing that I
shouldn't have been doing until
a few months ago -- which meant
that I was doing it longer than
I should have, I should have
been obviously -- is using my
iPhone, which has my personal
email on it, to send messages to
my office. Administrative
messages, not classified
information. WOODRUFF: Carter
said he stopped doing that "a
few months ago." That was well
after Democratic presidential
front-runner Hillary Clinton was
criticized for using her own
e-mail server as secretary of
state. On Wall Street, stocks
gave up all of yesterday's
gains, and then some. The Dow
Jones Industrial Average lost
more than 250 points to close
back below 17,500, the NASDAQ
fell 68 points, and the S&P 500
dropped 31. And, there's new
hope for paralyzed veterans who
want to walk again. The Federal
Veterans Affairs Department will
begin paying for robotic legs to
help vets with spinal cord
injuries. The powered
exoskeleton called a "Re-walk"
costs $77,000, a sum that's well
beyond what most veterans could
afford. Still to come on the
NEWSHOUR: how a fragile
ceasefire in Yemen impacts the
fight against ISIS, a portrait
of parenting in the U.S., the
refugee crisis takes a toll on
Greek fishermen, and much more.
(BREAK) WOODRUFF: Now, Yemen.
There were small signs of
progress today at peace
negotiations, but no sign the
shooting will stop in a country
that's been wracked by conflict
for more than a year. Our chief
foreign correspondent Margaret
Warner reports. MARGARET WARNER,
PBS NEWSHOUR CHIEF FOREIGN
CORRESPONDENT: It doesn't look
like a cease-fire in Yemen this
week. Tanks are still blasting,
gunfire still cracking across
battle lines, and dozens being
killed. Each side blames the
other. UNIDENTIFIED MALE:
(through translator): The
Houthis are the ones that
rejected the United Nations and
Security Council resolutions,
who carried out attacks and
struck residential homes and
civilians. And we are just
defending them. WARNER: The
strife started in fall 2014,
when Shiite Houthi rebels,
backed by Iran, overran broad
swaths of the country. They
seized the capital Sana'a from
government forces and militias
loyal to President Abd-Rabbu
Mansour Hadi. He spent months in
exile in Saudi Arabia, returning
only after a Saudi-led coalition
of nine Sunni Arab states
launched airstrikes in March
against the Houthis. Much of the
coalition's weaponry comes from
the U.S. and Britain. Fighting
was supposed to halt this week,
as U.N.-backed peace talks began
in a small town in Switzerland.
ISMAIL DULD CHEIKH AHMED, U.N.
SPECIAL ENVOY FOR YEMEN (through
translator): Our meeting comes
at a crucial moment in which
threats and dangers abound and
challenges are increasing both
locally and regionally. The
failure to reach a solution will
have disastrous human and
material consequences for the
nation. Anyone who does not
participate in the solution is
effectively helping to
perpetuate the crisis. WARNER:
There's much at stake for the
U.S. as well. Yemen is home to a
lethal al-Qaeda affiliate, AQAP,
which has tried to stage terror
attacks in the U.S. Yemeni
forces and U.S. air power had
beaten back AQAP fighters, but
the chaos has enabled them to
regain much of that territory.
The strife has also made room
for a new branch of the Islamic
State group to take root. And
the fighting the Houthis is
diverting the Gulf countries
from the broader war against
ISIS. What's more, it has
ravaged what was already the
Arab world's poorest country.
Some 6,000 have been killed, and
more than 2 million people have
fled their homes. MAJED MOHAMMED
(through translator): We fled
due to the shelling and shooting
that continues to happen there.
So I took my kids and came here.
WARNER: Majed Mohamed lives in
Taiz, Yemen's third largest
city. Many families like his
have found shelter in empty
school buildings, abandoned
because of the violence. Indeed,
entire neighborhoods now lie
empty. The U.N. estimates the
humanitarian crisis has affected
21 million people, more than 80
percent of the population. ALI
HAMED ALHAKAH (through
translator): Some have fled to
the countryside, some have fled
the country all together, and
some have fled to other cities.
This neighborhood has become a
town of ghosts. WARNER: Some aid
deliveries are getting to Yemen,
but distribution inside the
country has been nearly
impossible. Tarak Bach Baouab of
Doctors Without Borders"
explains. TARAK BACH BAOUAB,
HEAD OF MISSION IN YEMEN,
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDER: So it is
much difficult for humanitarian
workers to access those areas,
for convoys to reach sometimes
besieged areas, hospitals that
are basically in areas which are
completely surrounded by
checkpoints and where different
fighting parties are not
allowing humanitarian assistance
to get through. WARNER: U.S.
officials hope these talks will
lead to a permanent cease fire
and a flow of aid. Today,
negotiators did agree to let
supplies into hard-hit Taiz and
elsewhere. And Houthis and
government fighters in Aden
exchanged hundreds of prisoners.
But a political settlement of
this devastating conflict still
looks far away. SUBTITLE: In
Yemen, 19 million people lack
access to safe water and over 14
million people are insecure.
WOODRUFF: Economic and racial
divides are very much a focus in
the United States right now,
whether through the lens of
criminal justice, education, or
income inequality. Today, a
major new survey documents the
extent to which those divides
also play a role in parenting,
and the choices and concerns
mothers and fathers face. As an
example, the report released by
the Pew Research Center finds
that lower-income parents tend
to worry that their child might
be a victim of violence, or run
into trouble with the police.
While higher-income parents are
more likely to worry that their
children's overly busy schedules
may be causing them stress. To
help us explore more of the
report's findings, and the
potential effects different
child-raising practices might
have, we turn to Kim Parker of
the Pew Research Center, and
Lawrence Aber, he's a professor
of psychology and public policy
at New York University. And we
welcome you both. Kim Parker,
broadly speaking, to start this
off, how much difference is
there in the parenting styles
and approaches of parents at the
lower end of the income scale
and at the upper-end? KIM
PARKER, PEW RESEARCH CENTER: I
think the differences are less
in their style and approach, and
more in their outlook and their
worries and concerns and their
aspirations. We found that for
lower income parents, their
financial instability can really
limit their children's access to
a safe environment and the kinds
of extracurricular and enriching
activities that many more
affluent parents may take for
granted. WOODRUFF: Well, for
example we saw, I think we have
a graphic to show this,
participating -- this is just
participating in after school
activities. Families earning
over $75,000 a year, 84 percent
of those children participate in
organized sports, 62 percent in
some sort of organized music and
art. Under $30,000 income
families, 59 percent in sports,
still a significant percentage
but less, 41 percent in music
and art. I mean, that tells you
something. PARKER: It does. And
we also found, we asked about
after school programming for
kids, you know, so many parents
are working now and the kids
need somewhere to go after
school. And there was a lot of
concern among lower income
parents about the affordability
and availability of high quality
after school programs. And we
found that more affluent parents
are more likely to take
advantage of those kinds of
programs. And so, with after
school programs and also the
extracurriculars kids do on the
weekends, and in the evening,
those things take resources. And
I think for lower income
parents, there are just other
places where they have to put
that money. WOODRUFF: Kim
Parker, I was struck and we
cited some of this about how
parents of these different
income levels, what they worry
about for their children. I
mean, there's a real difference
there. PARKER: Real differences.
It was quite interesting to see.
We asked about a whole range of
different things that parents
could be concerned about. And we
found that lower income parents
have really a different set of
concerns and they tend to
revolve around their children's
safety. So, they are more likely
to worry that their child might
be shot or be beat up or
attacked or be kidnapped. And
all parents we found, the
overall -- the biggest concern
was that the child might be
bullied. But for more affluent
parents, the emotional
well-being of their kids,
whether they might be bullied or
suffer from depression or
anxiety, those things trump
those other types of safety
concerns that lower income
parents have. WOODRUFF:
Professor Aber at New York
University, does this -- how
does this track with what -- you
have done a lot of research and
writing on this, how does it
track with what you see?
LAWRENCE ABER, NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY: Very, very well. I
think the Pew report is
important in getting these facts
out. Over the last two decades,
we have increasingly realized
that the kinds of worries that
the report calls out for safety,
and the kinds of concerns that
parents have of low income, that
they can't get their kids into
extracurricular activities.
These come from a real
environment, differences that
children and their families live
in. Parents and children in the
upper income sector, and parents
and children in the lower income
sector are living in different
neighborhoods, different
schools. And this affects
parents' philosophies, attitudes
and behaviors. WOODRUFF: And it
affects -- Professor Aber, it
affects the time these parents
can spend with their children
including at early age -- at an
early age. ABER: It affects time
and it affects the opportunities
that children have. Parents have
two jobs, throughout their
children's minority. One job is
to protect them from safety and
to provide kind of security and
protect them from danger and
provide them security and safety
to go out into the world. And
the second is when they go out
into the world, to provide
opportunities to learn and to
develop. And these are both
things that are affected by the
neighborhoods that they're in,
as witnessed by the data that
Pew has been reporting.
WOODRUFF: Kim Parker, what do
you see in terms of discipline
and expectations about school
performance? PARKER: We have
found some really interesting
findings about parental
involvement in schools. And we
found tht across the
socioeconomic spectrum, parents
are very involved. The low
income and high income parents
are just as likely to say that
they go to parent teacher
conferences and go to PTA
meetings. But we also asked
whether -- you know, do you wish
you could be more involved in
your child education, and we
found that lower income parents
are more likely than high income
parents to say that they do wish
that they could be more
involved. And we had another
question where we pitted two
opinions against each other. One
was, can you ever be too
involved in your child's
education or too much
involvement be sometimes a bad
thing? And higher income and
more real educated parents, a
majority of them said, you know,
too much involvement can be a
bad thing. But for the lower
income parents, they said you
can never be too involved.
WOODRUFF: It's fascinating.
Professor Aber, what are the
implications of this for these
children as they grow up? ABER:
Well, the kind of thing that was
just describe where parents are
over-concerned, perhaps has to
be seen in this environmental
context. The kind of things that
we're talking about really
affect two kinds of things. One
is children's language and
cognitive development, and the
second is their social and
emotional development -- the
soft skills, the interpersonal
skills. And these are the very
roots of inequality that we're
seeing in this report. This is
how our nation is beginning to
pull apart. And we need to close
that so that parents' worries in
the low income neighborhoods are
reduced and the opportunities
for their kids are much, much
brighter. WOODRUFF: Kim Parker,
quickly, what do you see in
terms of the implications for
these children as they become
adults? PARKER: Well, I think
one thing that we haven't really
touched on is the sort of the
backdrop for this is the
changing family structure. And
the lower share of children that
are living in households with
two married parents is at a
record low now, 62 percent. And
a rising share of children that
are living in single parent
homes, and they are different
economic outcomes for those
types of families. If those
trends continue, this could have
real implications for children's
economic well-being going
forward. WOODRUFF: Yes, a lot to
think about and a lot for
policymakers to pay attention
to. Kim Parker with Pew Research
Center, Professor Lawrence Aber
at New York University -- thank
you both. ABER: Thank you.
(BREAK) WOODRUFF: Stay with us,
coming up on the NEWSHOUR: The
work of two detectives raises
questions of how police handle
rape cases, a liberal arts
college with a focus on
innovation, and "The Force
Awakens", the business
phenomenon of the "Star Wars"
franchise. But, first, the
latest figures from the United
Nations Refugee Agency show that
more than 800,000 refugees and
migrants have landed in Greece
by sea during 2015. Most of them
have arrived on the island of
Lesbos, five miles from the
Turkish coast. The impact of the
crisis on the Greeks who live on
the island has been both
economic and profoundly
emotional, as special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant
reports. MALCOLM BRABANT, PBS
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT:
2015 has been a transformative
year to every inhabitant of
Lesbos, not least fisherman
Costas Finteris (ph). COSTAS
FINTERIS, FISHERMAN (through
translator): Up until this year,
the sea for me meant fishing.
This year, it has changed
things. Now, it means fishing
for people. The consequences
have been a drop in my income
because when I see someone in
urgent need when I'm out
fishing, I drop everything and
go to help, because my work is
not as important as saving human
lives. The worst thing is the
drowned people, drowned mothers,
drowned children. BRABANT: One
of the worst days was in late
October when a boat carrying 300
people capsized. More than 30,
including several children, lost
their lives. UNIDENTIFIED
FEMALE: Five, six, seven, eight,
nine, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 --
FINTERIS: The pictures I saw
during those incidents which I
was seeing almost on a daily
basis would come back to me
while I was trying to sleep in
bed at night. I kept seeing
repeated pictures of the same
incidents as night mayors. I
couldn't sleep at all. BRABANT:
The children of Lesbos are
growing up on the front line of
the new Europe and here, they
are getting a practical lesson
in the Greek tradition of
"philoxenia" -- unconditional
hospitality and generosity to
strangers. They are brightening
up a new refugee camp on the
northern coast, under the
direction of their teacher,
Aphrodite Vatis. APHRODITE
VATIS, TEACHER: We want more
language. If we can even put
other language, 100 percent we
want that, and other languages,
if you can find Farsi also.
BRABANT: We met Aphrodite in
late October, as local
volunteers helped to off load a
stricken boat in rough seas.
VATIS: It's inhumane. It's
horrendous that they are putting
people in boats, sending them
across in weather like this.
It's changed, first of all, my
daily reality. I wake up now and
the first thing I have to do is
go to my family's hotel and see,
are there boats arriving? How
can we help them? And this is in
the morning. I have children, I
have a husband. I have my own
business. And so, the daily
things that we take for granted,
I was able to realize that I
took a lot of things for granted
very quickly, even just a moment
of free time, a moment of
spending with your own children.
These are the things that I miss
because there is no more free
time. Also, moments of feeling
carefree, they don't exist any
more because we see what is
going on around us in other
parts of the world. It has come
to our doorstep. So, it's
something that you can't sleep
very easily at night any more
either. BRABANT: For most new
arrivals, Lesbos is a
springboard to the rest of the
European Union, but it's become
a base for Aslam Obeid, formally
an aid worker who's remained in
Greece to help his fellow
travelers. While he is full of
praise for local people and
international volunteers, he's
disdainful of Europe's response.
ASLAM OBEID, AID WORKER FROM
DAMASCUS: What is Europe doing?
She is forcing from -- to accept
these people but what are they
doing? Paying trinkets, a few
billion euro to stop refugees
from coming. Yes, thank you,
Europe. Seriously thank you. Did
you spend one million for
helping. Europe has been paying
for transportation for people or
for helping. BRABANT: Latest
figures from the U.N. Refugee
Agency suggest that over 800,000
people have arrived in Greece by
sea this year. The average cost
for the place from Turkey to
Lesbos is $1,000. That means the
traffickers and Turkish side
could have made as much as $800
million. The Syrian and
fisherman have conflicting views
on this issue. OBEID: For me,
even, you call them heroes,
like, they are helping others.
The smuggler (INAUDIBLE) $800,
but the price is like $1,200 and
he just let him go. So, he's
like even helping others. It's a
business. It's not like a
(INAUDIBLE) or something.
FINTERIS: As far as I'm
concerned, they are murderers
because the boats they are using
to push these people from Turkey
are not seaworthy for this
passage. They are not suitable
for this part the Aegean.
BRABANT: The topography of
Lesbos has metamorphosed as a
result. This mountain of life
jackets behind me in northern
Lesbos covers an area the size
of a soccer pitch. There are
literally hundreds of thousands
of jackets here, every one
representing a human life. But
the economic impact on Lesbos is
the main entry point to Europe
for these refugees and migrants
has been seismic. The vacation
business on which so many people
depend has collapsed. Two years
ago, the charm of Lesbos lured
75,000 vacationers on package
tours on charter flights. And
the island had 60 lucrative
cruise liner stopovers in high
season. But so far, projected
charter bookings and cruise ship
dockings for next year stand at
zero. VATIS: All our businesses,
we have loans, we have to pay
the banks. Our biggest fear is
we won't be able to cover our
costs. If we can cover our costs
and get through the year, we
will be more than happy with
that, because we want to be able
to sustain our existence as long
as we can, until things turn and
we have an increase again in
tourism. BRABANT: Spending by
volunteers, aid agencies and the
migrants to the tune of a
hundred million dollars has
offset some of the losses. But
the overall long-term picture is
bleak. FINTERIS: My wish is that
the powers that be may work to
find a solution so that people
may live in peace, that the
whole world may live in peace.
BRABANT: But if anything, the
violence is escalating, which
means that Lesbos' crucial
position on the migrant trail
will continue. For the PBS
NEWSHOUR, I'm Malcolm Brabant in
Lesbos. (MUSIC) WOODRUFF: Now,
how one investigative journalism
project is shining light on how
police should handle rape
investigations -- and to Hari
Sreenivasan. HARI SREENIVASAN,
PBS NEWSHOUR ANCHOR: On August
11, 2008, an 18-year old
Washington woman reported she
had been raped at knifepoint in
her apartment. Days later, after
police questioned her about
inconsistencies in her story,
the woman said she made the
whole thing up. Except, there's
more, "An Unbelievable Story of
Rape" is the joint effort by two
non-profit news organizations,
The Marshall Project and
ProPublica, to tell the tale of
how two very different police
departments treated the
investigation. We are joined now
by co-author Ken Armstrong, a
staff writer for The Marshall
Project. He joins from Seattle.
So, Ken, I want to ask, I want
to tell our audience that we are
going to talk about the ends of
this story as well f they hadn't
read it yet. But what happens to
this woman when she goes into a
police department in Linwood,
Washington, and tells them this
she has been raped? KEN
ARMSTRONG, THE MARSHALL PROJECT:
Well, she tells police that she
was raped. And initially there
is no indication that police
doubt the truth of what she is
telling them. But quickly, as
soon as one day after, she
reports being raped, doubts set
in. And it really originates
with the call that comes into
the police station from the
woman's foster mother. The
foster mother says that she has
questions about whether this had
really happened. She wonders if
maybe this was a bid for
attention. With that one phone
call, the focus of the
investigation shifts. And
instead of pursuing the evidence
that is available to them, the
detectives decide to confront
the victim in this case, to
confront Marie, about whether
she, what she has reported has
really happened. So, they bring
her into the police station. And
they interrogate her as a
criminal suspect, instead of
questioning her as a rape
victim. And you know, she was 18
years old. She had no experience
with police. In the face of this
interrogation, she took what
under the circumstances she
considered to be the easiest way
out, which was to say, "I lied
about what had happened." So
she, in essence, recanted
everything that she had said on
the morning of the rape. And as
a result of that, she wound up
being charged with filing a
false police report.
SREENIVASAN: Now, this is all
happening in Linwood,
Washington. How does this
connect to a case in Colorado?
ARMSTRONG: Well, after she
admits to making the story up,
she takes a plea deal in which
she agrees to certain conditions
which include the need to get
counseling for lying about being
raped. And she agrees to go on
supervised probation for a year.
Two and a half years later, two
and a half years after she is
charged with filing a false
police report, a serial rapist
is arrested in Colorado. And
when police execute a search
warrant, they find in his
possession photographs which
turn out to prove definitively
that he had, indeed, raped Marie
in Linwood two and a half years
before. SREENIVASAN: And then
what happens, you know, this is
a tale of two different police
departments. But the police
department in Washington got
this wrong. What happened when
they figured this out?
ARMSTRONG: It did. They were
confronted with the fact that
they had made a mistake of
dramatic proportions. Not only
had they not believed a woman
who had, indeed been raped. They
had gone further and they had
punished her. They had filed a
citation charging her with false
reporting. So, they had to find
her and go and tell her that she
had been right all along. They
now recognized that. And they
tried to find out ways that they
could prevent this from
happening again. They ordered an
independent review and external
review to reconstruct the ways
in which they had gone off the
rails in this investigation.
SREENIVASAN: So, do police
departments around the country
keep track of how many rapes are
reported, how many people recant
this? Because it seems like in
the general arc of domestic
violence, that this would be a
common occurrence, that people
say, "yes, he hit me", something
happened and they were perhaps
intimidated by their attacker to
say, "No, no, you know what, I'm
not going to press charges, it
wasn't rape, it was consensual."
ARMSTRONG: Yes. They do keep
statistics. Local police
departments report numbers to
the FBI, but it can be a pretty
murky data set. In general, what
the FBI believes that about 5
percent of rape cases turn out
to be unfounded. What's less
clear is how often rape victims
are subsequently charged with
filing a false police report.
That would be a fraction of that
fraction, but it's an unknown
number. SREENIVASAN: So, why did
the Colorado department behave
so differently when they were
tracking their suspect based on
interviews that they had with
victims, versus the Washington
department? ARMSTRONG: You know,
the story proved to be a
remarkable contrast in the dos
and don'ts of investigating
rape. Everything that the police
in Washington did wrong, the
police in Colorado did right.
They listened to their victims.
They pursue the evidence,
chasing every lead. They
coordinated with one another.
And they didn't fall prey to
stereotypes about how someone
who is hurt should react. They
recognize that people react in
all kinds of different ways to
trauma and they shouldn't fall
prey to these misguided
assumptions about somebody being
un-credible simply because they
are not hysterical, necessarily,
or their body language in some
ways seems off. The police in
Colorado did a remarkable job of
identifying and arresting Mark
O'Leary. SREENIVASAN: All right.
You can read about the rapes in
Colorado and the one in
Washington, in a fantastic
story. It's both on The Marshall
Project Web site and in
ProPublica Web site. Ken
Armstrong, thanks so much for
joining us. ARMSTRONG: Thank
you, Hari. Appreciate it.
(MUSIC) WOODRUFF: Traditionally,
liberal arts colleges are not
necessarily the place you'd look
to as an incubator for start-up
ventures. But there's change in
the air, and some schools are
ready to move into new
territory. Our economics
correspondent, Paul Solman,
looks at why. It's part of our
weekly segment "Making Sense,"
which airs every Thursday on the
NEWSHOUR. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) PAUL
SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR ECONOMIC
CORRESPONDENT: What if all you
need to do to grow the perfect
garden is to lay down a mat of
vegetable seeds, add water, and
wait? CAM MACKUGLER,
ENTREPRENEUR: So you have an
optimally designed,
prefabricated garden that is
embedded in a sheet. The idea
was, how can I simplify the
process of gardening so that
anybody can have a garden
without any work? SOLMAN: So,
this is gardening for the
vegetably-challenged? MACKUGLER:
Or, herbally, fruitally,
flowerly-challenged. SOLMAN: Cam
MacKugler is a new-grown
entrepreneur, nurtured in an
unlikely hothouse: Middlebury
College, with just 2,500
students, known for over 200
years as a safe haven for the
liberal arts. Now it's spawning
companies like Seedsheet and
Iris Virtual Reality. LIZ
ROBINSON, ADMINISTRATOR,
MIDDLEBURY COLLEGE: You wear
goggles and you're able to look
through the goggles and actually
see the architectural rendering
of, maybe your new house or a
new building that you've asked
the architects to build. SOLMAN:
Administrator Liz Robinson says
these projects are just two of
many now being cultivated in
northern Vermont, a lot of them
in the campus's incubator space,
the old stone mill. UNIDENTIFIED
MALE: Middlebury helped a lot
because JoyRyde was just an
idea. And they helped to make it
into a tangible product. SOLMAN:
JoyRyde, an app that
incentivizes safe driving, won a
business challenge competition
at Middlebury, basically their
version of the show "Shark
Tank." UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It
sets a limit to your
interactions with your phone.
After three strikes, the app
knows that you had three strikes
and it will shut down your ride.
SOLMAN: There's also a fresh
food delivery service; a
skateboard company, and dozens
more. At Middlebury, even
musicians are now entrepreneurs.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We approach
this very seriously, like you
would a startup. We applied to
Middlebury's mid-challenge
grant, and that gave us the
money we need to make an album.
SOLMAN: All beneficiaries of the
school's programs on innovation
that provide mentors, money and
space like the old stone mill --
no strings attached; no
royalties to the school. We came
because we'd heard about
Middlebury and wondered: are the
liberal arts undergoing an
economic transformation? LAURIE
PATTON, PRESIDENT, MIDDLEBURRY
COLLEGE: I think that the next
stage for everyone around
entrepreneurship and higher
education is to integrate it
better and differently into the
traditional curriculum. SOLMAN:
New Middlebury president Laurie
Patton, freshly hired from Duke,
which has a major center for
entrepreneurship. But for
Patton, a professor of ancient
Hinduism, the
entrepreneur-academic connection
didn't click until she met a
young scholar trying to show the
relevance of Indian culture with
Sanskrit greeting cards. PATTON:
What she started was a greeting
card company. And she is really
thriving in this business
because Sanskrit is perfect as a
language of greeting. SOLMAN:
Entrepreneurship might even be a
way of saving a Sanskrit
department somewhere, as
universities yield to economic
pressure and sound the knell for
liberal arts departments that
don't attract enough students.
But to Brandeis University
English professor Billy Flesch,
though the economic pressures
are a problem, entrepreneurship
ought not be the answer. BILLY
FLESCH, BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY
ENGLISH PROFESSOR: I understand
that universities probably have
to become more entrepreneurial.
But I think that if what
universities are selling is a
better life of the mind, that's
great. If what universities are
selling is the idea that you'll
become a better salesman or
woman, that's not so great. I
think that risks corrupting
everything that we do. SOLMAN:
Do you see the emphasis on
entrepreneurship encroaching on
liberal arts schools like
Middlebury or Brandeis? FLESCH:
I do. SOLMAN: A liberal liberal
arts school, Middlebury's
emphasis is on social
entrepreneurship, businesses
which hope to do well by doing
good. EMILY NUNEZ CAVNESS,
CO-FOUNDER & CEO, SWORD &
PLOUGH: It's a Sword and Plough
day pack and it's made out of
repurposed Coast Guard uniform
material. SOLMAN: And, this is
-- this is like a backpack?
CAVNESS: Yes. SOLMAN: And that
can convert even those who come
for its famed focus on
languages. CAVNESS: That's why I
originally wanted to go to
Middlebury, to study foreign
languages. And I never would
have imagined that I would have
thought of an idea to launch a
social enterprise before I
graduated. SOLMAN: Emily Nunez
Cavness started Sword & Plough
as a senior. She was a French
major from a military family. In
ROTC at Middlebury, she served
in the Army in Afghanistan and
other undisclosed locations as a
Green Beret. CAVNESS: The idea
behind Sword & Plough is to work
with veterans to repurpose
military surplus material that
would otherwise be thrown away
and turn it into really
beautiful and functional bags.
And, also to donate 10 percent
of profits back to veteran
support organizations. SOLMAN: A
recycling enthusiast, Cavness is
also an enthusiast of
entrepreneurship in the college
environment. CAVNESS: It's
really the perfect incubator to
launch a business. You're in the
setting where you're supposed to
encourage to learn and think and
dream as much as you can. And
then there is also all of these
amazing resources, especially at
Middlebury College that help
you, take that idea and turn it
into a successful startup.
SOLMAN: Is the new emphasis on
entrepreneurship in higher
education a function of the lack
of good jobs out there for
graduates? PATTON: I think that
the market right now, makes
students more anxious than it
did 25 years ago, for sure. I
think there is something else
happening, though students are
not seeing themselves as in one
job forever. I had one recent
grad hand me her card with a
name and a number on it and she
said, "I could tell you what
company I am working at, but I
am not going to because we don't
do careers now, we do projects."
SOLMAN: But the obvious
objection is, this is dumbing
down, playing to the lowest
common denominator. PATTON: Yes,
I think that that is true of a
bad entrepreneurial curriculum.
But a good one, that really
focuses on the rationale for an
innovation, that truly focuses
on creativity, that forces
students to think through,
exactly what their plan is for
their new idea. I would say,
it's the opposite of dumbing
down. SOLMAN: But Professor
Flesch worries about practical
coaching over intellectual
debate. FLESCH: Teaching and
learning come out of conflict
and opposition and trying to
convince the other person that
their idea is wrong in some way
or other. More and more, there's
a sense that what we're supposed
to be doing is empowering
students rather than teaching,
letting them take the ideas that
they already have and sell them,
whereas I actually think
teaching is selling new ideas to
students. SOLMAN: OK, so that.
And so, these, the little seeds
are here. Back at Middlebury,
Cam MacKugler, selling his new
idea, to us. MACKUGLER: So then,
the customer unfolds this and
places it on top of their soil.
SOLMAN: I think I'm seedpod
challenged. MACKUGLER: Once
watered, these pods dissolve and
the plants that are embedded
within them will sprout and come
up through the openings in the
weed barrier fabric. And you
have the perfectly-arranged
garden that you've planted in 30
seconds. SOLMAN: And so, in the
yellow wood where Robert Frost
taught for four decades,
students are starting down the
road more taken these days:
using college to start a
business. For the PBS NEWSHOUR,
this is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from the
yellow woods and green mountains
of northern New England. (MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: Now the ever-
continuing, and yes, inescapable
saga of "Star Wars", as the
feature film, "Episode VII: The
Force Awakens," opens nationwide
this weekend, including at some
theaters tonight. Jeffrey Brown
has our look at what's become a
touchstone of movie storytelling
and money- making. JEFFREY
BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: We could say the
force has reawakened. But for
its fervent fans, and they are
legion, it's barely taken a nap,
not since the late 1970s. They
were out in force at the
frenzied, glittery, weird and
wild Los Angeles premier earlier
this week. CHARACTER: Nothing
will stand in our way. BROWN: To
see the start of a new trilogy
for a series, franchise, a
universe that can seemingly go
on forever. In his article, "The
force will be with us always",
Adam Rogers of "Wired Magazine"
refers to "Star Wars" as an
example of a paracosm. ADAM
ROGERS, ARTICLES EDITOR, WIRED
MAGAZINE: A paracosm is in
psychology terms, an imaginary
world. In the case of the "Star
Wars" movie, you can have a year
zero and go forward and back and
just set stories in the paracosm
and people are familiar, oh it
is a "Star Wars" story. These
universes are designed to not
end and not even begin. They can
stretch 10,000 in either
direction, "Star Wars"
especially. UNIDENTIFIED MALE:
An adventure unlike anything on
your planet. BROWN: It all back
in 1977. Filmmaker George Lucas
brought out the first "Star
Wars," introducing the world of
Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia,
Hans Solo and a host of other
characters, human and decidedly
not so. C3PO: I am C-3PO, a
human cyborg relations. BROWN:
Its enormous success as
"Washington Post" film critic
Ann Hornaday came as a surprise.
ANN HORNADAY, FILM CRITIC,
WASHINGTON POST: They didn't
think it would do much. Nobody
thought it would do much. BROWN:
The expectations weren't low.
HORNADAY: Expectations were
incredibly how but Hollywood, I
think, was so desperate for
something consistent to work
with like a model or template
that they thought if they could
just repeat and rebottle that
lightning over and over again,
that they would do it. So, that
is why we have our superhero
comic book franchise culture
today. BROWN: The beginning of
the franchise. HORNADAY: Oh,
absolutely. CHARACTER: Here is a
path to the dark side. BROWN:
The second trilogy unfolded
between 1999 and 2005. And now,
the story expands, in a film
directed by JJ Abrams. Speaking
to Jimmy Kimmel, the director
explained he was reluctant at
first to take it on. JJ ABRAMS,
FILMMAKER: I was only reluctant
because: A, I love the movie
"Star Wars" so much. I love the
original trilogy. I was 11 years
old when I saw the first one. It
had a profound impact on me. And
so, the idea of getting so close
to something kind of scared me a
little bit. CHARACTER: I will
show you the dark side. BROWN:
"The Force Awakens " introduces
a new cast. CHARACTER: I don't
know your name. CHARACTER: Finn,
what's yours. BROWN: John
Boyega, Daisy Ridley and Oscar
Isaac. While tying into the
original trilogy with the
presence of its stars.
CHARACTER: If I need this.
BROWN: It's a purposeful
approach to casting that keeps
the story moving in all
directions. ROGERS: Because
characters can enter and then
leave. In the "Star Wars"
universe, that they are building
right now, characters can die
and that's OK because that is
what happens in a real universe.
And then new characters can come
in and you can keep making
movies about them. BROWN: It's a
story-telling and money-making
power house. Disney bought the
franchise in 2012 for a galactic
$4 billion. Advance ticket sales
for the new film have already
broken records. And investment
bank Goldman Sachs predicts "The
Force Awakens" will take in some
$8 billion all together. The
breakdown, about $2 billion in
global box office, and $6
billion in retail sales, new
games and gadgets, of course.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You keep mac
and cheese in here? BROWN: But
also branded mac 'n cheese.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: "Star Wars"
Kraft macaroni and cheese.
BROWN: Data plan deals.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Because when
data, it is your only hope,
better matters. BROWN: "Star
Wars" dodge caravan posessions.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We're going
to need more valets.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You can build
the millennium falcon to defeat
them. BROWN: And a whole lot
more, films and merchandising
hands in hand. HORNADAY: Part of
this generation's fascination,
it does have to do with the
merchandising, and the toys and
ubiquity of the projects, and
then there was the Saturday
morning cartoons. I mean, this
universe, these characters and
these narratives have taken all
these different forms and these
different platforms that you and
I might not even be aware of,
but it show carried generation
after generation, so that we can
arrive at this place and time.
BROWN: A loyal fan base in fact
lives in this place and time,
inhabiting the "Star Wars"
universe, all across planet
earth. You see it in Japan.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Hello, Tokyo.
BROWN: Australia. UNIDENTIFIED
MALE: So exciting. We're going
to need your support. BROWN: And
Mexico. (CHANTING) BROWN: And
millions more of us it seems are
ready to go along for the ride
with every any turn. ROGERS:
"Star Wars" transcends again re
in some ways. It becomes
whatever we bring to it. It is
western, it's science fiction,
it's fantasy, it's philosophy,
it's a family drama. It becomes
a thing that all of us can
connect to on some level. BROWN:
And the new film does it live up
to the hoopla? Well, early
reviews including from "The
Washington Post's" Ann Hornaday
are strongly positive -- though
I wondered aloud how much that
even matters. This movie sort of
comes presold, right? HORNADAY:
Yes. BROWN: I mean, is it
critic-proof? Does it -- I hate
to say it, to put it on you, but
does matter what you say to
anybody? HORNADAY: Probably not.
And again, going back to how
this changed the movies, that is
another piece. It introduced
that idea to a presold audience
and that is increasingly what
Hollywood has wanted over the
last 20, 30 years, is something
that comes ready made. They call
it execution dependent. It's not
execute -- it does matter if the
movie is bad or good but they
will come because they are
curious and they're loyal. So,
you're probably right that the
critics don't matter, but we'll
try to make our presence felt
anyway. BROWN: She will have her
work cut out for her. Disney
plans to roll out at least five
more "Star Wars" films over the
next few years. From a galaxy
quite near you, I'm Jeffry Brown
for the PBS NEWSHOUR. WOODRUFF:
Next, we turn to our weekly
series, "Brief but Spectacular,"
our occasional series where we
ask interesting people to
discuss their passions. Tonight,
we hear from musicians Jack
Conte and Nataly Dawn of the
group Pomplamooose. Their music
is funded directly by fans
through the site patreon.com,
which was co- created by Jack
Conte. Here, they explain the
term "shot-gun creators." JACK
CONTE, POMPLAMOOSE: I think it's
funny when people say should
music be free? NATALY DAWN,
POMPLAMOOSE: Music is free.
CONTE: Music is free. Get over
that. DAWN: Yes. CONTE: Now,
figure out what to do about it.
One, two, three. DAWN: Covers
are basically free advertising
for our original music, and for
our music in general. We usually
re-harmonnize and just sort of
make it our own. (MUSIC) DAWN:
It took us awhile to start
making music together. CONTE: We
put out probably four, five
songs and then sort of realized
oh my gosh, there is a search
engine and people are searching
for songs like "Single Ladies",
if we cover that, people will
accidentally find our "Single
Ladies"song. (MUSIC) CONTE: The
day after we released the video,
Kanye got up with the Grammys
and did his thing. And the next
day, millions of people went on
to YouTube and searched Beyonce
"Single Ladies" and they seen
Nataly's face and click it. We
got about 500,000 views in a
24-hour period. If you see
Nataly singing the take, that's
the actual take that we recorded
in the studio. It's like seeing
the magic trick. You get to see
how sounds are made, because we
like to make a lot of weird
sounds and show people how to
make them. DAWN: And you also
get to see how lame people look
in the studio and how not
elegant the whole recording
process is. We make everything
at home. The music we do all of
the video editing. We do all of
the instruments. We did a
Pharrell Williams mashup, the
idea for the video was that
basically we would cut out these
big bits of foam core and
project things on to them and
try to get this natural 3D thing
going on with 3D objects. CONTE:
We film the whole thing in one
take with the camera kind of
swooping around. It was an
iPhone actually. We filmed it
with an iPhone. I like this term
"shotgun creator". It's just
sprays everywhere. It's a
creator who can do the whole
thing. It's a creator who can
edit and a creator who can write
songs and a creator who can sing
and a creator who can build
teams and manage people. And a
creator who can understand
camera gear, and their CEO of
their own media company. And
they run every department. DAWN:
I'm Nataly Dawn. CONTE: I'm Jack
Conte. DAWN: We are
Pomplamooose. CONTE: This is our
brief but spectacular take.
DAWN: On shotgun creators.
WOODRUFF: And it was pretty
spectacular. WOODRUFF: So,
finally tonight, our NEWSHOUR
shares -- something that caught
our eye that might be of
interest to you, too. In 1891,
James Naismith invented the
sport of basketball while he was
a physical education teacher at
Springfield College in
Massachusetts. Michael Zogry, an
associate professor of religious
studies at the University of
Kansas, recently discovered what
is thought to be the only known
recording of Naismith: a 1939
radio interview, in which he
recounts telling players to
throw a soccer ball into peach
baskets he'd nailed up in the
school's gymnasium. Here's an
excerpt: INTERVIEWER: And, what
rules did you have for your
first game Dr. Naismith? JAMES
NAISMITH, INVENTOR OF
BASKETBALL: Well, I didn't have
enough, and that's where I made
my big mistake. The boys began
tackling, kicking and punching
in the clinches. They ended up
in a free for all in the middle
of the gym floor. Before I could
pull them apart, one boy was
knocked out. Several of them had
black eyes and one of them had a
dislocated shoulder. It
certainly was murder. Well,
after that first match, I was
afraid they'd kill each other.
But they kept nagging me to let
them play again, so I made up
some more rules. The most
important one was there should
be no running with the ball.
That stopped tackling and
slugging. We tried out the game
with those rules, and we didn't
have one casualty. We had a fine
clean sport. WOODRUFF: Thank
you, Mr. Naismith. It all paid
off. On the NEWSHOUR online, why
is it so hard to tract potential
terrorists? P.J. Tobia answers
that question with two former
FBI agents who worked in
counterterrorism for this week's
episode of his podcast
"Shortwave". You can find it on
our home page, pbs.org/newshour.
And Friday on the NEWSHOUR, join
me on the set of "Downton
Abbey", as the final season of
the drama airs on PBS next
month. Actor Elizabeth McGovern
plays Cora, the countess of
Grantham, told me why she thinks
the show is so popular:
ELIZABETH MCGOVERN, ACTRESS: I
think there is something
relaxing about this world of
"Downton Abbey". Things were
more peaceful, you're not
inundated with text messages and
you're just in your house and
life is simpler. WOODRUFF: You
got to watch it. And that's the
NEWSHOUR for tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff. Join us online, and
again here tomorrow evening,
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks. For all of us at the PBS
NEWSHOUR, thank you and good
night.